DevOps eBook: GitHub Actions vs Azure Pipelines (#23441)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/devops-for-aspnet-developers/actions-vs-pipelines.md

> [!NOTE]
> The list of software installed on Azure Pipeline images is listed in [this repo](https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments/tree/master/images). You can select the platform folder and examine the *README.md* files. You can find information on GitHub hosted runners [here](https://docs.github.com/actions/reference/specifications-for-github-hosted-runners).

### Private agents and self-hosted runners

There are times when you can't utilize hosted images. For example, when you:

- Require SDKs or other software that is not installed on the images.
- Need to access resources that aren't public (such as an internal Sonarqube server or an internal Artifactory instance).
- Need to deploy to private networks.
- Need to install licenses for 3rd party software required for building your code.
- Need more storage or memory than is provided to the hosted agent images.
- Need more time than the maximum build time limit for hosted agents.

> > [!INFORMATION]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
```

No alert for `[!INFORMATION]` exists, please refer to [Alerts in the Contributor Guidance](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/contribute/markdown-reference#alerts-note-tip-important-caution-warning).

## Comparison of GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines

Azure Pipelines (YAML pipelines) provide a mature set of features such as approvals, artifact storage, deployment jobs, environments, gates, stages, templates, triggers, variable groups and more. For a full list of Azure Pipelines features, refer to the table [here](/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#feature-availability).

GitHub Actions are evolving rapidly and provide a set of features such as triggers for almost all GitHub events, artifact storage, environments and environment rules, starter templates, matrices and more. Read more about the full feature set of GitHub Actions [here](https://docs.github.com/actions).

### Feature comparison

(As of March 2021)

Feature|Description|GitHub Actions|Azure Pipelines
--|--|--|--
Approvals|Define approval conditions before moving further in the pipeline|Yes|Yes
Artifacts|Upload, store and download artifacts from jobs|Yes|Yes
Caching|Cache folders or files for subsequent runs|Yes|Yes
Conditions|Specify conditions for steps or jobs|Yes|Yes

> Container Jobs|Run jobs inside a container|No|Yes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Container Jobs|Run jobs inside a container|Yes|Yes
```

GitHub Actions support either JavaScript or Container actions, is this not a container job? Individual actions are steps within a job, and runnable as a container.

Demands|Specify demands that must be met to match jobs to agents|No|Yes
Dependencies|Specify dependencies between jobs or stages|Yes|Yes
Deployment Groups|A logical set of target machines for deployments|No|Yes
Deployment Jobs|Job that targets a deployment group|No|Yes
Environments|A collection of resources to target or a logical environment|Yes|Yes
Gates|Automatic collection and evaluation of signals to control continuation|No|Yes
Jobs|Sequence of steps that are executed on an agent|Yes|Yes
Service Containers|Manage the lifecycle of a containerized service instance availalbe for the duration of a job|Yes|Yes
Service Connections|Abstract credentials to external systems|No|Yes
Stages|Organize jobs in a pipeline|No|Yes

> Templates|Define reusable, parameterized building blocks|No|Yes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Templates|Define reusable, parameterized building blocks|Yes|Yes
```

While they're a bit different than the traditional `Templates` offered by Azure Pipelines, based on the "Define reusable, parameterize building blocks" definition, it's easy to argue that GitHub Actions does have this feature capability. Isn't this the standard workflow composition UI, where GitHub knows the defined input and outputs?

Author: No, what I am going for is a group of steps that form a "complex" block that has parameters. You can do this in Azure Pipelines, but not in GHA. For example, if I want a template for all .NET core apps, I may want a workflow that checks out code, runs `dotnet build`, `dotnet test`, `dotnet publish` and publishes the output. If I want to repeat that over 5 repos, I have to copy/paste that workflow - I can't define the steps as a template with parameters. I can do that using Azure Pipelines.

---

> title: DevOps with .NET and GitHub Actions - Comparing GitHub Actions with Azure Pipelines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: DevOps with .NET and GitHub Actions - Compare GitHub Actions with Azure Pipelines
```

description: GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines compared and contrasted for decision makers
author: colindembovsky
ms.date: 03/04/2021
---

> # Comparing and contrasting GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Compare and contrast GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines
```

> GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines have a common history - in fact, the Actions agent is a fork of the Pipelines agent. There are many similarities between GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines and it is worth comparing and contrasting them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines have a common history. In fact, the Actions agent is a fork of the Pipelines agent. There are many similarities between GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines and it's worth comparing and contrasting them.
```

## Pipelines as code

Before you compare GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines, you should consider the benefits of _pipelines as code_. Pipelines as code:

> [!div class="checklist"]

> * Benefit from standard source control practices (such as code reviews via pull request and versioning).
> * Can be audited for changes just like any other files in the repository.
> * Don’t require accessing a separate system or UI to edit.
> * Can fully codify the build, test, and deploy process for code.
> * Can usually be templatized to empower teams to create standard processes across multiple repositories.

> > [!INFORMATION]

Reviewer 3: This won't render as expected. I see it's used in another article [here](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/main/docs/architecture/containerized-lifecycle/docker-devops-workflow/docker-application-outer-loop-devops-workflow.md). I opened https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/23444 to fix it.

Author: Thanks @Youssef1313 - I'll update it to `NOTE`

> The term "pipelines" can also be referred to by several different interchangeable words: _pipeline_, _workflow_ and _build_ are common terms.

> [!INFORMATION]

> > In this article references to _Azure Pipelines_ are referring to [YAML Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-yaml-syntax), and not the older UI-based [Classic Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-the-classic-interface).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In this article, references to _Azure Pipelines_ are referring to [YAML Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-yaml-syntax), and not the older UI-based [Classic Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-the-classic-interface).
```

> > In this article references to _Azure Pipelines_ are referring to [YAML Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-yaml-syntax), and not the older UI-based [Classic Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-the-classic-interface).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In this article references to _Azure Pipelines_ are referring to [YAML Pipelines](/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-yaml-syntax), and not the older UI-based [Classic Pipelines](/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#define-pipelines-using-the-classic-interface).
```

## Agents and runners

Before you examine pipelines themselves, you should consider how these pipelines _execute_. Both GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines are really _orchestration engines_: when a pipeline is triggered, the system finds an "agent" and tells the agent to execute the jobs defined in the pipeline file.

Azure Pipelines run on _agents_. The agent is written in .NET, so it will run wherever .NET can run: Windows, Mac and Linux. Agents can even run in containers! Agents are registered to a [pool](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/pools-queues?view=azure-devops) in Azure Pipelines or to a repository or organization in GitHub. Agents can be _hosted_ or _private_.

> GitHub Workflows execute on _runners_. The runner code is essentially a fork of the Azure Pipelines code, so it is very similar. It is also cross-platform and you can also utilize _hosted_ or _self-hosted_ runners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub Workflows execute on _runners_. The runner code is essentially a fork of the Azure Pipelines code, so it's very similar. It's also cross-platform and you can also use _hosted_ or _self-hosted_ runners.
```

### Hosted agents and runners

> Hosted agents (Azure Pipelines) and hosted runners (GitHub) are agents that are spun up and managed by Azure DevOps or GitHub respectively. You do not need to maintain any build infrastructure. When a pipeline triggers that targets a hosted agent, an instance of the specified agent image is spun up. The job is run by the agent on the instance, and once the job completes, the instance is destroyed. The same applies for hosted runners running GitHub workflows.

Reviewer 2: Avoid "spun up", as it doesn't translate well to other languages.

```suggestion
Hosted agents (Azure Pipelines) and hosted runners (GitHub) are agents that are spun up and managed by Azure DevOps or GitHub respectively. You don't need to maintain any build infrastructure. When a pipeline triggers that targets a hosted agent, an instance of the specified agent image is created. The job is run by the agent on the instance, and once the job completes, the instance is destroyed. The same applies for hosted runners running GitHub workflows.
```

> [!INFORMATION]

> > The list of software installed on Azure Pipeline images is listed in [this repo](https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments/tree/master/images). You can click into the platform folder and examine the README.md files. You can find information on GitHub hosted runners [here](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/specifications-for-github-hosted-runners).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The list of software installed on Azure Pipeline images is listed in [this repo](https://github.com/actions/virtual-environments/tree/master/images). You can select the platform folder and examine the *README.md* files. You can find information on GitHub hosted runners [here](https://docs.github.com/actions/reference/specifications-for-github-hosted-runners).
```

### Private agents and self-hosted runners

> There are times when you can't utilize hosted images:
> 
> - you require SDKs or other software that is not installed on the images
> - you need to access resources that are not public (such as an internal Sonarqube server or an internal Artifactory instance)
> - you need to deploy to private networks
> - you need to install licenses for 3rd party software required for building your code
> - you need more storage or memory than is provided to the hosted agent images
> - you need more time than the maximum build time limit for hosted agents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are times when you can't utilize hosted images. For example, when you:

- Require SDKs or other software that isn't installed on the images.
- Need to access resources that aren't public, such as an internal Sonarqube server or an internal Artifactory instance.
- Need to deploy to private networks.
- Need to install licenses for third-party software required for building your code.
- Need more storage or memory than is provided to the hosted agent images.
- Need more time than the maximum build time limit for hosted agents.
```

> [!INFORMATION]

> > It is possible to install tools and SDKs when running pipelines on hosted agents. If the install steps do not take long, this is viable. However, if the tools/software take a long time to install, then you may be better off with a private agent or self-hosted runner, since the install steps will need to execute for every run of the workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> It's possible to install tools and SDKs when running pipelines on hosted agents. If the install steps don't take long, this is viable. However, if the tools/software take a long time to install, you may be better off with a private agent or self-hosted runner, since the install steps will need to execute for every run of the workflow.
```

### Azure DevOps agents

> Every Azure DevOps account has a Hosted pool with a single agent that can run one job at a time and some amount of free build minutes. You can purchase additional "hosted pipelines" in Azure DevOps. When you purchase an additional hosted pipeline, you’re really removing the build minutes limit and adding _concurrency_: one pipeline can run one job at a time, two pipelines can run two jobs simultaneously and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every Azure DevOps account has a hosted pool with a single agent that can run one job at a time and some amount of free build minutes. You can purchase additional "hosted pipelines" in Azure DevOps. When you purchase an additional hosted pipeline, you're really removing the build minutes limit and adding _concurrency_. One pipeline can run one job at a time. Two pipelines can run two jobs simultaneously, and so on.
```

### Comparison of agents

Feature|GitHub|Azure Pipelines|Links
--|--|--|--

> Hosted agents for public repos/projects|Free|[No free minutes](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/devops/change-in-azure-pipelines-grant-for-public-projects/) for public projects|[Azure Pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/hosted?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml#capabilities-and-limitations) [GitHub](https://github.com/features/actions)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hosted agents for public repos/projects|Free|[No free minutes](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/devops/change-in-azure-pipelines-grant-for-public-projects/) for public projects|[Azure Pipelines](/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/hosted?view=azure-devops&tabs=yaml#capabilities-and-limitations) [GitHub](https://github.com/features/actions)
```

> Hosted agents for private repos/projects|2000 minutes free per month, 3000 minutes for Pro and Team licenses, 50000 minutes for Enterprise license. Additional minutes may be purchased.|One free parallel job that can run for up to 60 minutes each time, until you've used 1,800 minutes (30 hours) per month. You can pay for additional capacity per parallel job. Paid parallel jobs remove the monthly time limit and allow you to run each job for up to 360 minutes (6 hours).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hosted agents for private repos/projects|2,000 minutes free per month, 3,000 minutes for Pro and Team licenses, 50,000 minutes for Enterprise license. Additional minutes may be purchased.|One free parallel job that can run for up to 60 minutes each time, until you've used 1,800 minutes (30 hours) per month. You can pay for additional capacity per parallel job. Paid parallel jobs remove the monthly time limit and allow you to run each job for up to 360 minutes (6 hours).
```

Cross-platform|Yes|Yes|

> Scale set agents|No|Yes|Read about scale-set agents [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/scale-set-agents?view=azure-devops)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scale set agents|No|Yes|Read about scale-set agents [here](/azure/devops/pipelines/agents/scale-set-agents?view=azure-devops)
```

## Comparison of GitHub Actions and Azure Pipelines

> Azure Pipelines (YAML pipelines) provide a mature set of features such as approvals, artifact storage, deployment jobs, environments, gates, stages, templates, triggers, variable groups and more. For a full list of Azure Pipelines features, refer to the table [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#feature-availability).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Azure Pipelines (YAML pipelines) provide a mature set of features such as approvals, artifact storage, deployment jobs, environments, gates, stages, templates, triggers, variable groups and more. For a full list of Azure Pipelines features, refer to the table [here](/azure/devops/pipelines/get-started/pipelines-get-started?view=azure-devops#feature-availability).
```

> GitHub Actions are evolving rapidly and provide a set of features such as triggers for almost all GitHub events, artifact storage, environments and environment rules, starter templates, matrices and more. Read more about the full feature set of GitHub Actions [here](https://docs.github.com/en/actions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub Actions are evolving rapidly and provide a set of features such as triggers for almost all GitHub events, artifact storage, environments and environment rules, starter templates, matrices and more. Read more about the full feature set of GitHub Actions [here](https://docs.github.com/actions).
```

Demands|Specify demands that must be met to match jobs to agents|No|Yes
Dependencies|Specify dependencies between jobs or stages|Yes|Yes
Deployment Groups|A logical set of target machines for deployments|No|Yes
Deployment Jobs|Job that targets a deployment group|No|Yes
Environments|A collection of resources to target or a logical environment|Yes|Yes
Gates|Automatic collection and evaluation of signals to control continuation|No|Yes
Jobs|Sequence of steps that are executed on an agent|Yes|Yes
Service Containers|Manage the lifecycle of a containerized service instance availalbe for the duration of a job|Yes|Yes
Service Connections|Abstract credentials to external systems|No|Yes
Stages|Organize jobs in a pipeline|No|Yes
Templates|Define reusable, parameterized building blocks|No|Yes
Starter Templates|Defines a starter workflow based on the type of code detected in a repo|Yes|No
Triggers|Set of events that cause the pipeline to trigger|Yes|Yes
Variables|Variables that can be passed in, statically or dynamically defined|Yes|Yes
Variable Groups|Store values for use across multiple pipelines|No|Yes

## Recommendation table for common scenarios

> The following table shows some common scenarios as well as a recommendation for which platform to use. As always, there will be exceptions, so consider your exact scenario carefully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following table shows some common scenarios and platform recommendations for each. As always, there will be exceptions. Consider your exact scenario carefully.
```

Requirement|Platform
--|--
I need to create reusable templates to standardize how jobs are executed across multiple teams|Azure Pipelines
I need to have automated gates control pipeline progress|Azure Pipelines
I need to define multiple stages|Azure Pipelines
I need multiple jobs to target the same environment|Azure Pipelines
I need to model multiple, complex environments|Azure Pipelines
I need to use the same environments across multiple projects/repos|Azure Pipelines
I have repos that are not in GitHub|Azure Pipelines
I need to create custom tasks that are not open source|Azure Pipelines
I need a simple workflow for building and deploying open source repositories to a small set of environments|GitHub Actions

> I need to model workflows for scenarios other than CI/CD (e.g. custom alerts on Pull Requests)|GitHub Actions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I need to model workflows for scenarios other than CI/CD. For example, custom alerts on pull requests|GitHub Actions
```
